refactor (#325)
KxSystems/docs: docs/architecture/rq.md

---
title: RBB (r.q) | Documentation for q and kdb+
description: How to construct an RDB
keywords: kdb+, q, rdb, streaming
---
# Real-time Database (RDB) using r.q

`r.q` is available from :fontawesome-brands-github:[KxSystems/kdb-tick](https://github.com/KxSystems/kdb-tick)

## Overview

A kdb+ process acting as an RDB stores a current day’s data in-memory for client queries.
It can write its contents to disk at end-of-day, clearing out it in-memory data to prepare for the next day.

> After writting data to disk, it will instruct a HDB to load the written data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After writing data to disk, it instructs a HDB to load the written data.
```

### Customization

`r.q` provides a starting point to most environments. The source code is freely avaialble and can be tailered to individual needs. For example:

#### Memory use

> The default RDB will store all of a days data in memory before end-of-day writting to disk. The host machines should be configured that all required resources 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default RDB stores all of a days data in memory before end-of-day writing to disk. The host machines should be configured that all required resources 
```

can handle the demands that may be made of them (both for today and the future).
Depending on when there may be periods of low/no activity, [garbage collection](../ref/dotq.md#gc-garbage-collect) could be deployed after clearing tables at end-of-day, or a system for intra-day writedowns.

#### User queries

> A gateway process should control user queries and authorisation/authentication, using RDBs/RTEs/HDBs to retrieve the required information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A gateway process should control user queries and authorization/authentication, using RDBs/RTEs/HDBs to retrieve the required information.
```

If known/common queries can be designed, the RDB can load additional scripts to pre-define functions a gateway can call.

### End-of-day

> The end-of-day event is governed by the tickerplant process. The tickerplant calls the RDB [`.u.end`](#uend) function when this event occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The end-of-day event is governed by the tickerplant process. The tickerplant calls the RDB [`.u.end`](#uend) function when this event occurs.
```

The main end-of-day event for an RDB is to save todays data from memory to disk, clear its tables and cause the HDB to be aware of a new days dataset for it to access.

!!! Note "[.u.rep](#urep) sets the HDB directory be the same as the tickerplant log file directory. This can be edited to use a different directory if required"

### Recovery

Using IPC, the RDB process can retrieve the current tickerplant log location and use via the [variables](tickq.md#variables) the tickerplant maintains.
The function [`.u.rep`](#urep) is then used to populate any tables from the log.

> !!! Note "The RDB should have tickerplant log available from a directory on the same machine. The RDB/tickerplant can be changed to reside on different hosts but this will entail the increased resource utilisation of transmitting the log file contents over the network."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Note "The RDB should be able to access the tickerplant log from a directory on the same machine. The RDB/tickerplant can be changed to reside on different hosts but this increases the resources needed to transmit the log file contents over the network."
```
